\documentclass[report.tex]{subfile}

\begin{document}

\section{Method}
This section covers the steps taken in order to create and evaluate the
classifer.

\subsection{Partitioning of training data}
The training data is split up into three different subsets. Two sets are used
for the training process; the training set and the validation set. The training
set is used to train multiple classifiers with different parameters, and the
validation set is used to select which of these classifiers to use. The third
and final set, the test set, is used after the training is completed in order
to evaluate how well the classifier performs. The subsets were split uniformly
for each digit and the distribution was 70\%, 10\% and 20\% for the training,
validation and test set respectively.

\subsection{Preprocessing}
The input data for each data is given as a list of 3D-coordinates that together
form a curve in the shape of a digit. As the digits are aligned along the plane
of the XY axes, the Z-coordinate is simply ignored and the curves are treated
as 2D only. The digits are first translated and scaled to a common location and
size and then rasterized into a grayscale image. The grayscale image is then
dilated so that the digits become thicker. The intensity of each pixel is
finally treated as a large vector. Each pixel represents an input neuron in the
neural network.

\subsubsection{Scaling}
\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/scale_3d1.tex}}
        \caption{Six \#1, raw}
    \end{subfigure}%
    {\large $\rightarrow$}
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/scale_before1.tex}}
        \caption{Six \#1, projected}
    \end{subfigure}%
    {\large $\rightarrow$}
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/scale_after1.tex}}
        \caption{Six \#1, scaled}
    \end{subfigure}\\
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/scale_3d2.tex}}
        \caption{Six \#1, projected}
    \end{subfigure}%
    {\large $\rightarrow$}
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/scale_before2.tex}}
        \caption{Six \#2, raw}
    \end{subfigure}%
    {\large $\rightarrow$}
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/scale_after2.tex}}
        \caption{Six \#2, scaled}
    \end{subfigure}
    \caption{Two sixes before and after projection and scaling.}
    \label{fig:scaling}
\end{figure}
Because the digits are written at different locations and in different sizes,
rescaling and translation is performed to make similar shaped images
comparable. Only the shape of the digit is interesting and the location and
scale can therefore be changed without losing any useful information. Figure
\ref{fig:scaling} shows two sixes being scaled.

\subsubsection{Rasterization}
\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \vspace*{-3.5mm}
        \resizebox{\textwidth}{!}{\input{build/fig/rasterize_0.tex}}
        \vspace*{-10mm}
        \caption{Scaled}
    \end{subfigure}%
    {\large $\rightarrow$}
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \centering
        \resizebox{0.8\textwidth}{!}{%
            \includegraphics{build/fig/rasterize_1.png}%
        }
        \vfill
        \caption{Rasterized}
    \end{subfigure}%
    {\large $\rightarrow$}
    \begin{subfigure}[c]{0.3\textwidth}
        \centering
        \resizebox{0.8\textwidth}{!}{%
            \includegraphics{build/fig/rasterize_2.png}%
        }
        \vfill
        \caption{Dilated}
    \end{subfigure}%
    \caption{Rasterization of a two with some noise.}
    \label{fig:raster_noise}
\end{figure}
Because the digits are written at different locations and in different sizes,
rescaling and translation is performed to make similar shaped images
comparable. Only the shape of the digit is interesting and the location and
scale can therefore be changed without losing any useful information. Figure
\ref{fig:scaling} shows two sixes being scaled. 

When the digits are located in the same position and are of similar scale the
digits can be rasterized. The rasterization is performed by rasterizing each
line of the curve. The rasterization is performed by using Xiaolin Wu's line
drawing algorithm. The algorithm is described in Wu's article in \emph{Computer
Graphics}\cite{wu-line}.

Each rasterized curve is then added to the final image by taking the maximum
intensity of the previous pixel and the pixel of the curve.

Finally, dilation is performed to make the digits thicker. The dilation is
performed by applying a two-dimensional convolution to the image with the
matrix
\begin{equation*}
    D =
    \begin{bmatrix}
        0.5 & 0.8 & 0.5 \\
        0.8 &   1 & 0.8 \\
        0.5 & 0.8 & 0.5
    \end{bmatrix}.
\end{equation*}
In this way, the inner pixels of digits will be 1 and the edges will be between
0 and 1, which could be useful for the classifier because the same digit
usually have edges in around the same location.

One good thing about rasterization is that it decreases the impact of noise as
is demonstrated in figure \ref{fig:raster_noise}. Also, duplicate overlapping
lines will look the same as if there was only one line.

\subsection{Neural network - multilayer perceptron}
\begin{figure}
    \centering
    \input{doc/fig/mlp.tex}
    \caption{}
    \label{fig:mlp}
\end{figure}
The classifier was implemented using a multi-layer perceptron with one hidden
layer. The input layer consists of all the intensities of the pixels of the
grayscale image resulting from the preprocessing of the input. An additional
fully white pixel is added in order to provide a bias for the weights.

The details of a multi-layer perceptron is described in chapter 6 of the book
\emph{Pattern Classification}\cite{hart-pattern}. Here will only be described
shortly how the classifier of this project was implemented.

\subsubsection{Feedforward}
% TODO math expressions

\subsubsection{Backpropagation}
% TODO math expressions

\subsubsection{Training}

\subsubsection{Classification}
In order to classify a digit the the digit is preprocessed as described above
and the resulting pixels are used as the input for the neural network with the
weights provided by the training. The feedforward operation is performed and
the strongest output neuron determines the classification of the digit.

\end{document}
